=== git

* Replace UINT2FIX with UINT2NUM since UINT2FIX is not defined in MRI ruby.
* Don't return the terminating null from C in GetProgramInfoLog.
* Remove the outdated website, use gh-pages now.
* Fixes in tests, resolved some upstream mesa bugs.
* glMaterial: Before converting using to_a, check if conversion is possible.
* Fix incorrect conversion of bool arguments to functions, they were getting
  converted from C instead of to C (`GL_TRUE/true` got converted to `41`).

=== 0.8.0 / 2013-02-03

* Drop support for Ruby 1.8.
* Wrap glut callbacks in GVL release/acquire for better thread support.
* Add OpenGL::Buffer for mapped buffers that allows writing.

=== 0.7.0 / 2013-02-03

* Better support of 64 bit systems.
* Replace mkrf with extconf.rb, hoe and rake-compiler.
* Switch to dlopen() from deprecated NSAddImage() and friends for OS X.
* glBegin, glPushMatrix, glEnable and glEnableClientState now accept a block.
* glEnable/glDisable and glEnableClientState/glDisableClientState now accept
  multiple arguments.
* Allow to_a-able objects for glColor*v, glRasterPos*v, glRect*v, glTexCoord*v,
  glMaterial, glNormal and glVertex.
* Fix unused param count in ARY2CMAT.
* Fix a lot of bugs in the test suite.
* Merge opengl C extensions into a single extension to avoid code duplication
  in extconf.rb and simplify rebuilding based on header changes.
* Add cross compilation tasks with download of freeglut for binary windows gems

=== 0.60.1 / 2009-02-16

* Bugfixes
* Proper support for ruby 1.9/1.9.1+
* Updated OpenGL enumerators in preparation for OpenGL 3.0

=== 0.60.0 / 2008-01-06

* Automatic error checking for GL/GLU calls, enabled by default (see
  doc/tutorial)
* Added support for many more OpenGL extensions
* Support for Ruby 1.9.0+ (requires mkrf 0.2.3)
* Ton of bugfixes.

* API Changes:
	* Boolean functions/parameters was changed to ruby true/false instead of
	  GL_TRUE / GL_FALSE, which remains for compatibility
	* glGet\* functions now returns +x+ instead of <code>[x]</code> when
	  returning only one value
	* Functions operating on packed strings (glTexture, glPointer etc.) now
	  also accepts ruby arrays directly
	* Matrix handling functions now also accepts instances of Matrix class, or
	  any class that can be converted to array
	* glUniform*v and glUniformmatrix*v now does not require 'count'
	  parameter, they will calculate it from length of passed array
	* glCallLists needs type specifier (previously was forced to GL_BYTE)
	* On ruby 1.9, glut keyboard callback returns char ("x") instead of integer
	  so using 'if key == ?x' works on both 1.8 and 1.9

