= opengl

source :: https://github.com/drbrain/opengl
docs   :: http://ruby-opengl.rubyforge.org
bugs   :: https://github.com/drbrain/opengl/issues
email  :: mailto:ruby-opengl-devel@rubyforge.org

== Description

An OpenGL wrapper for Ruby.  ruby-opengl contains bindings for OpenGL and the
GLU and GLUT libraries.

== Features and Problems

* available for Windows, Linux, OS-X

== Synopsis

  require 'opengl'
  FIX (code sample of usage)

== Requirements

* Ruby 1.9.2+
* proper OpenGL, GLU and (free-)GLUT development files installed

== Install

  gem install opengl --pre

== Developers

After checking out the source, run:

  $ rake newb

This task will install any missing dependencies, run the tests/specs,
and generate the RDoc.

== Cross compiling for Windows

Using rake-compiler a cross compiled opengl gem can be build on a Linux or MacOS X
host for the win32 platform. The generated gem is statically linked against
libfreeglut. Freeglut is downloaded and compiled from the sources.
There are no runtime dependencies to any but the standard Windows
DLLs.

Install mingw32 or w64 using the instructions in rake-compiler's README.
For Debian/Ubuntu it is <tt>apt-get install gcc-mingw-w64</tt> .

Download and cross compile ruby 1.9 for win32 with:

  rake-compiler cross-ruby VERSION=1.9.3-p0

Download and cross compile opengl for win32:

  rake cross native gem

or with custom versions:

  rake cross native gem RUBY_CC_VERSION=1.9.3 LIBFREEGLUT_VERSION=2.8.0

If everything works, there should be ruby-opengl-VERSION-x86-mingw32.gem in the pkg
directory.


== License

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) Eric Hodel  (current maintainer)
Copyright (c) Alain Hoang (previous maintainer)
Copyright (c) Jan Dvorak  (contributor)
Copyright (c) Minh Thu Vo (contributor)
Copyright (c) James Adam  (contributor)

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

